+++
title = "Trip Report Czech Republic"
slug = "2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic"
published = 2010-04-12T20:16:00.002000+02:00
author = "Jef Claes"
tags = [ "Travel",]
+++
Last week [my girlfriend](http://amillionimpressions.blogspot.com/) and
I went on a short holiday to the city of
[Plzeň](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plze%C5%88) in the [Czech
Republic](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Czech_Republic). In this post you
can find a small trip report.  
  
<span style="font-weight:bold;">Roadtrippin'</span>  
  
Minutes after leaving home we discovered an unpleasant surprise; my Tom
Tom has no map of the Czech Republic. Good thing that people used to
print this stuff on paper. After consulting a paper map of Europe we did
have an idea which direction to follow.  
  

  
  
The route was easy enough though; straight ahead for 800km. Driving
through Germany was a blast. For those not from Europe; the biggest part
of the [German autobahn](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autobahn) has no
speedlimit.  
  
<span style="font-weight:bold;">Prague</span>  
  
The highlight of our holiday was
[Prague](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prague). A lot of the historic
architecture is still intact, making Prague an impressive city and
deservingly one of the most-visited cities in Europe.  
  
Some of the sights we visited were..  
  
The [Charles Bridge](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Bridge). This
bridge is one of the most popular sights in Prague and has a [very rich
history](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charles_Bridge#History). It's over
600 (!) years old.  
  
[![](../images/thumbnails/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_012.2.jpg)](../images/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_012.2.jpg)  
The [Petřínská
rozhledna](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pet%C5%99%C3%ADn_Lookout_Tower)
on top of the [Petřín](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pet%C5%99%C3%ADn)
hill is a miniature version of the Eiffel Tower. On top of the Petřínská
rozhledna you have a great view of the Prague skyline.  
  
[![](../images/thumbnails/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_024.2.jpg)](../images/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_024.2.jpg)  
The [Prague Castle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Prague_Castle) is one
of the biggest castles in the world. Today it still houses the Czech
government.  
  
[![](../images/thumbnails/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_030.JPG)](../images/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_030.JPG)  
The [Saint Vitus's
Cathedral](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St._Vitus_Cathedral) next to the
Prague Castle is the biggest and most important church of the Czech
Republic.  
  
[![](../images/thumbnails/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_037.JPG)](../images/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_037.JPG)  
<span style="font-weight:bold;">Plzeň</span>  
  
Plzeň is known worldwide for it's
[Pilsener](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilsener) beer and it's
[Skoda](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C5%A0koda_Auto) factories.
Although industry made [Plzeň](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Plze%C5%88)
one of the biggest cities of the Chzech Republic, the number of tourist
attractions is rather limited..  
  
We had some good laughs at the
[Dinopark](http://www.dinopark.cz/dinopark-plzen-english/).  
  
[![](../images/thumbnails/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_079.JPG)](../images/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_079.JPG)  
We also visited the famous [Pilsner
Urquell](http://nl.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pilsner_Urquell) museum and got a
bonus show! That evening the soccer match [Viktoria
Plzen](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/FC_Viktoria_Plze%C5%88) vs [Sparta
Prague](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sparta_Prague) took place. While we
were standing in front of the Pilsner Urquell museum 80 fully equipped
cops stormed a restaurant on the other side of the street to arrest some
hooligans. Sweet action!  
  
[![](../images/thumbnails/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_086.jpg)](../images/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_086.jpg)  
<span style="font-weight:bold;">Final thoughts</span>  
  
Although the Czech Republic does not have a good reputation, I think all
the problems this country used to have belong to the past. The people
were nice, the culture was rich and everything was pretty cheap compared
to most European countries. Definitely worth visiting!  
  
[![](../images/thumbnails/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_090.JPG)](../images/2010-04-12-trip-report-czech-republic-Pilsen_090.JPG)
