+++
title = "2011 Annual Review"
slug = "2011-12-26-2011-annual-review"
published = 2011-12-26T21:35:00+01:00
author = "Jef Claes"
tags = [ "General",]
+++
Since the end of the year is approaching, I would like to look back on
2011 and take a peek at 2012. Unlike the years before, I'm hardly
setting any goals this year. Interests change so quickly, and new
opportunities present themselves so regularly, I feel like it might be
ignorant to set these things in stone.  
  
**My career**  
  
The year started out interesting, working on a brand new product for
fire departments at Ferranti Computer Systems. Although my role in this
project should have been fairly satisfying, I still felt like my
position back then failed to fill a certain void. That's why I decided
to take the leap into [the Great
Unknown](http://jclaes.blogspot.com/2011/08/high-hopes.html).  
  
In September, I started working for [Euricom](http://www.euri.com/) as a
consultant. So far, I haven't regretted making that decision at all, I
ended up in a group of intelligent, progressive and enjoyable people.  
  
**Blog**  
  
This year I managed to write 69 posts (70 including this one), which is
a bit more than the year before.  
  
Plenty of posts have gotten [decent
attention](http://jclaes.blogspot.com/2011/12/2011s-most-read-posts.html)
this year, making the traffic tripple compared to 2010. And no matter
how other bloggers claim you shouldn't care about your blog statistics,
this does mean a bunch to me.  
  

[![](/post/images/thumbnails/2011-12-26-2011-annual-review-BlogTraffic.PNG)](/post/images/2011-12-26-2011-annual-review-BlogTraffic.PNG)

The main topics I wrote about this year were mostly web related (HTML5,
JavaScript and ASP.NET MVC). I even wrote some opinionated posts this
year, which I found harder, but also more rewarding.  
  
Last year, I set a goal to get better at MVC and to at least look at
WebMatrix. I spent a large part of the year building things in ASP.NET
MVC at the day job, so that goal was easily achieved. I built [one small
thing](http://jclaes.blogspot.com/2011/09/real-developer-knows-when-to-pull-plug.html)
in
[WebMatrix](http://jclaes.blogspot.com/2011/05/my-thoughts-on-webmatrix.html),
which was enough to give me a feel of what WebMatrix is all about.  
  
My guess is that I will cover similar topics next year. My faith in the
web has only grown stronger. I think the rise and rise of the browser
and JavaScript provides us with unseen opportunities, but also with an
enormous amount of challenges. I am really eager to start looking more
into *serious* JavaScript development.  
  
**Community**  
  
I think I did fairly well this year. I attended several local community
meetings and got to to know a lot of nice people in the process.  
  
The highlight probably was [my own talk on WebSockets at HTML5
Webcamps](http://jclaes.blogspot.com/2011/04/video-slides-and-source-from-my.html).
I really enjoyed that experience. I do not aspire to be a speaker
though, but should I have interesting things to talk about, I probably
won't reject invitations.  
  
I'm not sure if I will be doing a lot of community events in 2012. I
often don't seem to get out of them what I hoped for. Also, Euricom
regularly organizes meetups to talk about all things software
development. These will already consume plenty of time.  
  
**Travelling**  
  
This year my girlfriend and I did [a three-week roadtrip along the West
Coast](http://jclaes.blogspot.com/2011/09/once-upon-time-in-west.html).
This trip was by far the best time of our lives. We are determined to
undertake similar projects in the future again.  
  
Next to that, we revisited the Czech Republic, taking plenty of time to
[visit
Prague](http://jclaes.blogspot.com/2011/04/prague-impressions.html) this
time.  
  
We're not sure what 2012 will bring. Right now, we are looking into
something more nearby, Italy.  
  
**Sport/Health**  
  
Last year I picked up boxing, but I had to give that up due to
scheduling conflicts. I have been working a tweaked [P90X
routine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/P90X) twice a week instead, which
is very much recommended.  
  
I reasonably succeeded in achieving my running ambitions. Altogether, I
ran somewhere around 800 kilometers (= 500 miles) this year. This
summer, I probably was in the best shape of my life, running 15 km
pretty (= 9 miles) comfortably. Although the graph below suggests that
I'm slacking, it's only partially true. I have been doing shorter (and
higher paced) runs lately, increasing the intensity. Running is probably
one of the sports that give me the most energy in return, so I intend to
stay at it.  
  

[![](/post/images/thumbnails/2011-12-26-2011-annual-review-nikeplus.PNG)](/post/images/2011-12-26-2011-annual-review-nikeplus.PNG)

  
**Conclusion**  
  
2011 has been an eventful year for me. In 2012, I hope to be able to
keep doing the things I love, surrounded by the people I love. Trying to
live life as much as I can.  
  
**I wish you and your family the best for 2012. That the new year may
bring you health, love and plenty of hacking.Â **
